User documentation - Hybrid Scan (#218)
microsoft/hyperspace: docs/_docs/03-ug-mutable-dataset.md

## Options of using index when your dataset changes

1. [Refresh Index](#refresh-index)
  - [Full Mode](#refresh-index---full-mode)
  - [Incremental Mode](#refresh-index---full-mode)
2. [Hybrid Scan](#hybrid-scan)
  - [Append-only](#append-only-dataset)
  - [Append and Delete](#append-and-delete-dataset)

> 

Author: I'm not sure where is the best for `Optimize Index` in this structure..

Reviewer: I see. Maybe we should put optimize in a separate md file? (We can reference it from incremental refresh, for example). @pirz, WDYT?

Reviewer 2: @imback82 @sezruby - Sure, I actually like putting optimize in a separate doc as it is not directly related to the problem of "handling updates in a mutable dataset", which is the focus of this document. Optimize does not incorporate data changes into the index. If others agree, I can move it to a new page in on-going PR #217

TODO

### Hybrid Scan

Hybrid Scan enables to utilize existing index data along with newly appended source files or
deleted existing files, without explicit refresh operation. For appended files, Hybrid Scan works
by changing the query plan to perform on-the-fly shuffle of newly appended data and merge with

> the index data. For deleted files, Hyperspace also modify the plan to exclude the rows from deleted files

Reviewer 2: Rephrase suggestion:
"For an index with appended source data files, HybridScan changes the query plan to shuffle new data on-the-fly and merge it with index records".

> the index data. For deleted files, Hyperspace also modify the plan to exclude the rows from deleted files

Reviewer 2: "... also modify the plan ..." --> "... also modifies the plan ..."

in the index data and for this, you need to set the lineage column config at index creation.

> This feature is disabled by default.

Reviewer 2: "Currently, HybridScan is disabled by default. You can check the configuration page to see how it can be enabled."

> Currently, HybridScan is disabled by default. You can check the configuration page to see how it can be enabled.

Reviewer 2: Lets add URL of the configuration page:
".. check the [configuration](02-ug-configuration.md) page ..."

In the current version (0.3), Hybrid Scan with deleted files needs further optimization when
there are many deleted files in source dataset. Therefore, we provide 2 different configurations
for Hybrid Scan, so that you could enable it on demand.

#### Append-only dataset

If your dataset is append-only dataset, you can use Hybrid Scan for appended files only.
In this case, Hyperspace does not perform Hybrid Scan for those indexes which have one or more
deleted files in their source dataset.

> ###### Configuration

Author: use 6 of # - since 5 of # looks similar to 4 of #

spark.enableHyperspace
query.show
```

Now, the following example shows how Hybrid Scan works with appended files.

```scala
// Append new data to source dataset.
Seq((3, "name3"), (4, "name4")).toDF("id", "name").write.mode("append").parquet("table")

// Check if the index is applied for the dataset with appended files.
val df = spark.read.parquet("table")
val query = df.filter(df("id") === 1).select("name")
hs.explain(query, verbose = true)

// Turn on Hybrid Scan and check if the index is applied.
spark.conf.set("spark.hyperspace.index.hybridscan.enabled", true)
hs.explain(query, verbose = true)

// Query execution with Hybrid Scan.
spark.enableHyperspace
query.show
```

#### Append and Delete dataset

Now, we can consider handling deleted files. Basically, Hybrid Scan excludes indexed data from deleted source files
by scanning all indexed rows and confirming if it is from deleted source files or not.
In order to trace which source file each row is from, you need to enable linage column config before creating an index.
Check the [configuration](https://microsoft.github.io/hyperspace/docs/ug-configuration/) page to see how lineage is enabled when creating an index.

> Because of this nature of processing deleted rows, Hybrid Scan with deleted files is more expensive than appended files.

Reviewer 2: suggestion:
"Due to the way Hybrid Scan enforces deletes at the query time, supporting deletes is more expensive than appended files and it could cause performance regression if an index has a large number of deleted source data files."

Author: I revised a bit:
Due to the way Hybrid Scan enforces deletes at the query time, supporting deletes is more expensive than appended files. It could cause performance regression if an index has a number of deleted source data files, especially for an index which is less effective for a given query.

Reviewer 2: if you prefer to drop "large" from "a large number of deleted source ...", you may wanna change it as:
"If an index has some deleted source data files".

My only concern about above rephrase is: "... an index which is less effective for a given query.".
Today, we dont have a way to measure how effective an index is for a query (we have not yet formally defined it either).
So, if a user asks: "How can I know if Index XX is less effective for query Q?" - We dont really have a clear answer for that.
WDYT @sezruby ? Should we drop the "less effective" part (or change it)?

Author: I revised a bit. I thought `it could cause performance regression if an index has a large number of deleted source data files.` seems like there will be always perf regression with many deleted files.

TODO

### Hybrid Scan

> Hybrid Scan enables to utilize existing index data along with newly appended source files or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hybrid Scan utilizes existing index data along with newly appended source files and/or
```

> deleted existing files, without explicit refresh operation. For an index with appended source data files,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
deleted source files, without explicit refresh operation. For an index with appended source files,
```

HybridScan changes the query plan to shuffle new data on-the-fly and merge it with index records.

> For an index with deleted source data files, Hyperspace also modifies the plan to exclude the rows from deleted files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For an index with deleted source files, Hyperspace also modifies the plan to exclude the rows from deleted files
```

Reviewer: I am keeping it consistent this as "source files" as you first used it in line 101. (Can you check other places?)

in the index data. This requires enabling lineage for the index at its creation time.

Currently, HybridScan is disabled by default. You can check the [configuration](https://microsoft.github.io/hyperspace/docs/ug-configuration/)
page to see how it can be enabled.

> In the current version (0.3), if a dataset has many deleted source data files, query performance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a dataset has many deleted source data files, query performance
```

Reviewer: I think we can remove version info in this context.

could degrade when Hybrid Scan is enforcing deletes at the query runtime. 
Hyperspace provides two different configurations to tune this behavior. 
You can use them to enable supporting deletes during Hybrid Scan and determine when it should be applied,

> depending on the total number of deleted source data files.

Reviewer: You can spell out the config name here and add a link to the page as well.

#### Append-only dataset

If your dataset is append-only dataset, you can use Hybrid Scan for appended files only.

> In this case, Hyperspace will not pick an index with some deleted source data file(s) for Hybrid Scan.

Reviewer: Should we also mention that lineage is not required in this scenario as a side note?

Due to the way Hybrid Scan enforces deletes at the query time, supporting deletes is more expensive than appended
files. It could cause performance regression if an index has a number of deleted source data files, especially for
an index which is less effective for a given query.
Therefore, you need to be aware of possible regression from it.

We will provide several threshold configs after some experiments and optimizations.

###### How to enable

You can use the following configurations to enable Hybrid Scan for indexes on a dataset with both append and delete files.
You need to call `spark.enableHyperspace` after setting the configuration to load additional modules for Hybrid Scan.

We currently provide one threshold config:
`spark.hyperspace.index.hybridscan.delete.maxNumDeleted`. If there are more deleted files than the config value,
we do not perform Hybrid Scan for the index.

Scala:
```scala
import com.microsoft.hyperspace._
spark.conf.set("spark.hyperspace.index.hybridscan.enabled", true)
spark.conf.set("spark.hyperspace.index.hybridscan.delete.enabled", true)

> // spark.conf.set("spark.hyperspace.index.hybridscan.delete.maxNumDeleted",  30) // 30 by default

Reviewer: why is this commented out?

spark.enableHyperspace
```

Python:
```python
from hyperspace import Hyperspace

spark.conf.set("spark.hyperspace.index.hybridscan.enabled", true)
spark.conf.set("spark.hyperspace.index.hybridscan.delete.enabled", true)

> // spark.conf.set("spark.hyperspace.index.hybridscan.delete.maxNumDeleted",  30) // 30 by default

Reviewer: I believe it's # for comments in Python.

```

### Hybrid Scan

Hybrid Scan utilizes existing index data along with newly appended source files and/or deleted
source files, without explicit refresh operation. For an index with appended source files,
HybridScan changes the query plan to shuffle new data on-the-fly and merge it with index records.
For an index with deleted source files, Hyperspace also modifies the plan to exclude the rows from
deleted files in the index data. This requires enabling lineage for the index at its creation time.

Currently, HybridScan is disabled by default. You can check the [configuration](https://microsoft.github.io/hyperspace/docs/ug-configuration/)
page to see how it can be enabled.

If a dataset has many deleted source files, query performance could degrade when Hybrid Scan is
enforcing deletes at the query runtime. Hyperspace provides two different configurations to tune
this behavior. 
You can use them to enable supporting deletes during Hybrid Scan (spark.hyperspace.index.hybridscan.delete.maxNumDeleted)
and determine when it should be applied, depending on the total number of deleted source files (spark.hyperspace.index.hybridscan.delete.enabled).

> You can check the detail in [Append and Delete](#append-and-delete-dataset) section.

Reviewer: nit: can we use "\`" for configs? `spark.hyperspace.index.hybridscan.delete.maxNumDeleted` to make it stand out?

#### Append-only dataset

If your dataset is append-only dataset, you can use Hybrid Scan for appended files only.
In this case, Hyperspace will not pick an index with some deleted source file(s) for Hybrid Scan.
Hybrid Scan with only appended source files does not need the [lineage column](#lineage)
and any other pre-requisite.

###### How to enable

You can use the following configurations to enable Hybrid Scan for indexes on an append-only dataset.

Scala:
```scala
spark.conf.set("spark.hyperspace.index.hybridscan.enabled", true)
spark.conf.set("spark.hyperspace.index.hybridscan.delete.enabled", false) // false by default
```

Python:
```python
spark.conf.set("spark.hyperspace.index.hybridscan.enabled", true)

> spark.conf.set("spark.hyperspace.index.hybridscan.delete.enabled", false) // false by default

Reviewer: Use `#` for comment?
